Reduce dispute coordinator load (#5785)
paritytech/polkadot: roadmap/implementers-guide/src/node/disputes/dispute-coordinator.md

If a candidate turns out invalid in approval checking, the `approval-voting`
subsystem will try to issue a dispute. For this, it will send a message
`DisputeCoordinatorMessage::IssueLocalStatement` to the dispute coordinator,
indicating to cast an explicit invalid vote. It is the responsibility of the
dispute coordinator on reception of such a message to create and sign that
explicit invalid vote and trigger a dispute if none for that candidate is
already ongoing.

In order to raise a dispute, a node has to be able to provide two opposing votes.
Given that the reason of the backing phase is to have validators with skin in
the game, the opposing valid vote will very likely be a backing vote. It could
also be some already cast approval vote, but the significant point here is: As
long as we have backing votes available, any node will be able to raise a
dispute.

Therefore a vital responsibility of the dispute coordinator is to make sure backing
votes are available for all candidates that might still get disputed. To
accomplish this task in an efficient way the dispute-coordinator relies on chain
scraping. Whenever a candidate gets backed on chain, we record in

> chain storage the backing votes (gets overridden on every block). We provide a

Author: State gets not accumulated - I'll try to clarify.

available) on any chain, then the dispute can never conclude, hence nobody gets
slashed. It makes sense to point out that this is less bad than it might sound
at first, as trying to participate in a dispute for a non existing candidate is
"relatively" cheap. Each node will send out a few hundred tiny request messages
for availability chunks, which all will end up in a tiny response "NoSuchChunk"
and then no participation will actually happen as there is nothing to
participate. Malicious nodes could provide chunks, which would make things more
costly, but at the full expense of the attackers bandwidth - no amplification
here. I am bringing that up for completeness only: Triggering a thousand nodes
to send out a thousand tiny network messages by just sending out a single
garbage message, is still a significant amplification and is nothing to ignore -
this could absolutely be used to cause harm!

#### Participation

As explained, just blindly participating in any "dispute" that comes along is
not a good idea. First we would like to make sure the dispute is actually
genuine, to prevent cheap DoS attacks. Secondly, in case of genuine disputes, we

> would like to be able to be able to conclude one after the other, in contrast to

Reviewer: double "to be able" typo

  participated, as this suggests in our threat model that there was at least one
  honest node that already voted, so the dispute must be genuine.

Note: A node might be out of sync with the chain and we might only learn about a
block including a candidate, after we learned about the dispute. This means, we
have to re-evaluate participation decisions on block import!

With this nodes won't waste significant resources on completely made up
candidates. The next step is to process dispute participation in a (globally)
ordered fashion. Meaning a majority of validators should arrive at at least
roughly at the same ordering of participation, for disputes to get resolved one
after another. This order is only relevant if there are lots of disputes, so we
obviously only need to worry about order if participations start queuing up.

We treat participation for candidates that we have seen included with priority
and put them on a priority queue which sorts participation based on the block
number of the relay parent of that candidate and for candidates with the same
relay parent height further by the `CandidateHash`. This ordering is globally
unique and also prioritizes older candidates.

> The later property makes sense, because if an older candidate turns out invalid,

Reviewer: latter?

participation until we have some confirmation of the authenticity of the
dispute, we should also not blindly import all votes arriving into the
database as this might be used to just slowly fill up disk space, until the node
is no longer functional. This leads to our last protection mechanism at the
dispute coordinator level (dispute-distribution also has its own), which is spam
slots. For each import, where we don't know whether it might be spam or not we
increment a counter for each signing participant of explicit `invalid` votes.

The reason this works is because we only need to worry about actual dispute
votes. Import of backing votes are already rate limited and concern only real
candidates for approval votes a similar argument holds (if they come from
approval-voting), but we also don't import them until a dispute already
concluded. For actual dispute votes, we need two opposing votes, so there must be
an explicit `invalid` vote in the import. Only a third of the validators can be
malicious, so spam disk usage is limited to ```2*vote_size*n/3*NUM_SPAM_SLOTS```, with
n being the number of validators.
-
More reasoning behind spam considerations can be found on

> this sr-lab ticket: https://github.com/paritytech/srlabs_findings/issues/179

Reviewer 2: This is a private link

## Disputes for Non Included Candidates

We only ever care about disputes for candidates that have been included on at
least some chain (became available). This is because the availability system was

> designed for precisely that: Only with inclusiong (availability) we have

Reviewer: inclusion typo

- Ensuring malicious approval votes will be recorded, so nodes can get slashed
  properly.
- Coordinating actual participation in a dispute, ensuring that the node
  participates in any justified dispute in a way that ensures resolution of
  disputes on the network even in the case of many disputes raised (flood/DoS
  scenario).
- Provide an API for chain selection, so we can prevent finalization of any
  chain which has included candidates for which a dispute is either ongoing or
  concluded invalid and avoid building on chains with an included invalid
  candidate.
- Provide an API for retrieving (resolved) disputes, including all votes, both
  implicit (approval, backing) and explicit dispute votes. So validators can get
  rewarded/slashed accordingly.

## Ensuring That Disputes Can Be Raised

If a candidate turns out invalid in approval checking, the `approval-voting`
subsystem will try to issue a dispute. For this, it will send a message
`DisputeCoordinatorMessage::IssueLocalStatement` to the dispute coordinator,
indicating to cast an explicit invalid vote. It is the responsibility of the
dispute coordinator on reception of such a message to create and sign that

> explicit invalid vote and  trigger a dispute if none is already

Reviewer 3: Nit: No dispute is ongoing for *the same* dispute ?

Author: Yep, thanks Tara! will clarify!

Author: dispute for the same candidate to be precise. Clarified.

> explicit invalid vote and  trigger a dispute if none is already

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
explicit invalid vote and trigger a dispute if none is already
```
nit: extra space

Author: Thanks!

dispute.

Therefore a vital responsibility of the dispute coordinator is to make sure backing
votes are available for all candidates that might still get disputed. To
accomplish this task in an efficient way the dispute-coordinator relies on chain
scraping. Whenever a candidate gets backed on chain, we record in
chain storage the backing votes (gets overridden on every block). We provide a
runtime API for querying those votes. The dispute coordinator makes sure to
query those votes for any non finalized blocks: In case of missed blocks, it
will do chain traversal as necessary.

Relying on chain scraping is very efficient for two reasons:

1. Votes are already batched. We import all available backing votes for a
   candidate all at once. If instead we imported votes from candidate-backing as
   they came along, we would import each vote individually which is
   inefficient in the current dispute coordinator implementation (quadratic
   complexity).
2. We also import less votes in total, as we avoid importing statements for
   candidates that never got successfully backed on any chain.

It also is secure, because disputes are only ever raised in the approval voting

> phase. A node only starts the approval process after it has seen a candidate

Reviewer 3: I am personally missing some context and especially the sequence of the different phases referenced here, but assuming the intended audience would have gained more familiarity.

Author: Yep phases are explained in the remainder of the guide, so that should be good: But thanks for pointing that out - that's precisely the feedback I was hoping for. :-)

included on some chain, for that to happen it must have been backed previously.
Therefore backing votes are available at that point in time. Signals are
processed first, so even if a block is skipped and we only start importing
backing votes on the including block, we will have seen the backing votes by the
time we process messages from approval voting.

In summary, for making it possible for a dispute to be raised, recording of
backing votes from chain is sufficient and efficient. In particular there is no
need to preemptively import approval votes, which has shown to be a very
inefficient process. (Quadratic complexity adds up, with 35 votes in total per candidate)

> Approval votes are very relevant non the less as we are going to see in the next

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Approval votes are very relevant nonetheless as we are going to see in the next
```

   wasting lots of resources _always_ for the exceptional case of a dispute.
2. Import votes batched when possible, to avoid quadratic import complexity.
3. Take into account that approval voting is still ongoing, while a dispute is
   already running.

With a design where approval voting sends votes to the dispute-coordinator by
itself, we would need to make approval voting aware of ongoing disputes and
once it is aware it could start sending all already existing votes batched and
trickling in votes as they come. The problem with this is, that it adds some
unnecessary complexity to approval voting and also we might still import most of
the votes unbatched, but one-by-one, depending on what point in time the dispute
was raised.

Instead of the dispute coordinator telling approval-voting that a dispute is
ongoing for approval-voting to start sending votes to the dispute coordinator,
it would make more sense if the dispute-coordinator would just ask
approval-voting for votes of candidates that are currently disputed. This way
the dispute-coordinator can also pick the time when to ask and we can therefore
maximize the amount of batching.

> 

Reviewer 3: I had to read this more than once, maybe I'd write something like so: 
Therefore, instead of the dispute coordinator informing approval voting of an ongoing dispute and to begin forwarding *(all?)* votes to the coordinator; it makes more sense for the dispute coordinator to just ask approval voting for the votes of candidates in dispute. This way, the dispute coordinator can also pick the best time for maximizing the number of votes in the batch.

Author: Thanks!

Now the question remains, when should the dispute coordinator ask
approval-voting for votes? As argued above already, querying approval votes at
the beginning of the dispute, will likely already take care of most malicious
votes. Still we would like to have a record of all, if possible. So what are
other points in time we might query approval votes?

In fact for slashing it is only relevant to have them once the dispute
concluded, so we can query approval voting the moment the dispute concludes!

> There are two potential caveats with this though:

Reviewer 5: I see 2 issues.

1. this introduces a race condition - Approval-Voting only keeps around votes until finality. After a dispute concludes, the chain can be finalized. This is based off of off-chain (i.e. non-consensus) information, in particular, the dispute votes that have been seen by the local node as gathered through the return value of `DisputeCoordinatorMessage::DetermineUndisputedChain` in `relay_chain_selection.rs`. The block could be finalized with only f+1 honest validators having seen the dispute conclude, which means that whatever our scheme for posting bad votes is, we need to ensure that any subset of f+1 honest validators can supply them to the chain.
2. The approval-voting DB doesn't persist the signatures of approval-votes. It just keeps a per-candidate bitfield. This was deliberately done to save space (and later undermined with the dispute-coordinator), but it means that the approval-voting DB doesn't have a way to provide the signed approval messages on a candidate requested after-the-fact.

Reviewer 5: (2) is just an engineering issue but worth considering.

(1) is maybe not that important because I think the Gambler's ruin still holds as long as at least 1 validator gets 100% slashed (this is guaranteed by the nature of the dispute) and deep network-level attacks on the entire network to prevent some messages from being seen by specific validators and having those validators finalize a specific block would be extremely difficult - of course, worthwhile, because anyone pulling off that attack even partially would save themselves tens of millions of dollars per attack attempt. However, if we are relaxing this it's best to be explicit about the adjustments to the security model that are being made.

Author: Covered in guide and created a ticket: https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot/issues/5864 , together with the existing [vote recovery ticket](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot/issues/3398) this should be covered. Thanks for those great insights, they made the implementation more messy than I would have liked unfortunately. While I would be eager to come up with something better, I will in the interest of time and because no real security guarantees get violated (we might only miss on slashing some/but never all offenders in some edge cases),  defer resolution to those tickets for now.

1. Timing: We would like to rely as little as possible on implementation details
   of approval voting. In particular, if the dispute is ongoing for a long time,
   do we have any guarantees that approval votes are kept around long enough by
   approval voting? So will approval votes still be present by the time the
   dispute concludes in all cases? The answer should luckily be yes: As long as
   the chain is not finalized, which has to be the case once we have an ongoing
   dispute, approval votes have to be kept around (and distributed) otherwise we
   might not be able to finalize in case the validator set changes for example.

>    Conclusively we can rely on approval votes to be still available when the

Reviewer 5: I addressed this above - only guaranteed to hold true for some set of f+1 honest validators.

If you raise a dispute, because you claim a candidate is invalid, although it is
in fact valid - you will get slashed, hence you pay for consuming those
resources. The issue is: This only works if the dispute concerns a candidate
that actually exists!

If a node raises a dispute for a candidate that never got included (became
available) on any chain, then the dispute can never conclude, hence nobody gets
slashed. It makes sense to point out that this is less bad than it might sound
at first, as trying to participate in a dispute for a non existing candidate is
"relatively" cheap. Each node will send out a few hundred tiny request messages
for availability chunks, which all will end up in a tiny response "NoSuchChunk"
and then no participation will actually happen as there is nothing to
participate. Malicious nodes could provide chunks, which would make things more
costly, but at the full expense of the attackers bandwidth - no amplification
here. I am bringing that up for completeness only: Triggering a thousand nodes
to send out a thousand tiny network messages by just sending out a single
garbage message, is still a significant amplification and is nothing to ignore -

> this could absolutely be used to cause harm!

Reviewer 5: AFAIK these 'remote' disputes are still posted on-chain, never conclude because they are by definition only participated in by a superminority, and also lead to a slash when they time out. Although the leak is somewhat slower.

Author: This is already assuming [this](https://github.com/paritytech/srlabs_findings/issues/179#user-content-fnref-1-6e95f46a1eeaedce9b8a9461647a0870) proposed alternative handling of potential dispute spam to be in place.

#### Participation

As explained, just blindly participating in any "dispute" that comes along is

> not a good idea. First we would like to make sure the dispute is actually

Reviewer 5: To be clear, we wanted to leave the door open to remote disputes because excluding the possibility of disputing spam candidates just punts the issue of resource wasting up to backing, although we can handle it there with other techniques.

Reviewer 5: unavailable remote disputes (for candidates that were never included anywhere) need different availability techniques and aren't really important, but we should be explicit about the reasons why we don't handle this.

Author: > To be clear, we wanted to leave the door open to remote disputes because excluding the possibility of disputing spam candidates just punts the issue of resource wasting up to backing, although we can handle it there with other techniques.

Related to this, does the following reasoning make any sense: https://github.com/paritytech/srlabs_findings/issues/179#issuecomment-1206300579 ?

Author: I added some reasoning about them to the guide as well.
